---
layout:        infographic
title:         "Greenhouse gas emissions in Czechia by sectors"
slug:          "emissions-czechia"
redirect_from: "/emissions-czechia"
published:     2022-07-26
weight:        50
tags-scopes:   [ cz ]
tags-topics:   [ emissions ]
caption:       "Distribution of greenhouse gas emissions (in tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> equivalent) in Czechia per year and sector. In 2018, the country's total annual emissions were 129.39 million tonnes, which was 12.19t CO<sub>2</sub>eq per capita."
---

## How to read this graph?

All values in the graph are <glossary id="anthropogenicgreenhousegases">anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions</glossary> of CO<sub>2</sub>, N<sub>2</sub>O, CH<sub>4</sub>, HFC, PFC, SF<sub>6</sub>, NF<sub>3</sub> expressed as <glossary id="co2eq">CO<sub>2</sub>eq</glossary>. The CO<sub>2</sub> equivalent unit considers the long-term effect of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and converts them into an amount of CO<sub>2</sub> that would have the same effect. For more, see the article [Global warming potential](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_warming_potential)

The annual emissions volume of the Czech Republic is 129.39 million tonnes CO<sub>2</sub>eq (2018 data). __In per capita terms, this is 12.19 tonnes CO<sub>2</sub>eq/capita.__

## What do the individual sectors mean?

* __Energy sector:__ 51.07 million tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> (39.5% of total emissions, 4,810 kg CO<sub>2</sub>eq per capita per year). Emissions in the energy sector come mainly from the combustion of lignite in power plants (32.88 million tonnes, or 25.4% of total annual emissions), followed by thermal power plants (12.4 million tonnes, or 9.6% of total annual emissions) and fuel production and treatment (5.79 million tonnes, or 4.5% of total emissions). The largest single CO<sub>2</sub> emitter is the Počerady lignite-fired power plant, which produces 5.52 million tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> per year, or 4.26 % of the Czech Republic's total emissions. The four largest Czech lignite power plants, Počerady, Prunéřov, Tušimice and Chvaletice, produce roughly the same annual CO<sub>2</sub> emissions as all road transport. Energy savings and the development of renewable and low-carbon energy sources can reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector.
* __Transport:__ 20.3 million tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> (15.7% of total emissions, 1910 kg CO<sub>2</sub>eq per capita per year). Passenger car transport produces 10.9 million tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> (9.2%) per year, while freight and bus transport is responsible for 6.76 million tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> (5.2%). Train transport is included in the graph but is too small to show (308 thousand tonnes CO<sub>2</sub>eq, 0.2% of total annual emissions). Emissions from air transport are 1.26 million tonnes CO<sub>2</sub>eq (1%, 120 kg per capita per year) and correspond to emissions produced by flights from Czech airports. It is likely to be underestimated (many Czechs fly from Vienna or Bratislava) and does not fully account for the amount of emissions that Czechs cause. (For example, a Czech flight to New York with a connection in Amsterdam will only be counted as Prague-Amsterdam in the emissions shown, whereas the Netherlands will count emissions from an Amsterdam-New York flight.) Also not accounted for is that emissions released high in the atmosphere have approximately twice the effect. Transport emissions can be reduced by switching to low-carbon fuels (e.g. electricity, biomethane or hydrogen), increasing the share of train and bus travel and reducing the need for transport (which may mean living closer to work).
* __Industrial processes:__ 16.26 million tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> (12.6% of total emissions, 1530 kg CO<sub>2</sub>eq per capita per year). Emissions from industrial processes that release greenhouse gases into the atmosphere other than through the combustion of fossil fuels - cement production, iron and steel production, etc. Specific annual figures for individual items: cement and other mineral production 3.08 Mt (2.38%); chemical industry 2.05 Mt (1.58%); steel and other metal production 6.95 Mt (5.37%); refrigeration and air conditioning gases 3.7 Mt (2.86%).
* __Combustion in the industry:__ 9.96 million tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> (7.7% of total emissions, i.e. 940 kg CO<sub>2</sub>eq per capita per year). Emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels for industrial use, typically when something needs to be heated during production (distillation, drying, melting, etc.).
* __Domestic, institutional and agricultural combustion:__ 13.15 million tonnes of CO<sub>2</sub> (10.2% of total emissions, i.e. 1240 kg CO<sub>2</sub>eq per capita per year). This sector includes heating and hot water (unless a heating plant supplies the energy), cooking, etc. It also includes fuel combustion in agriculture and forestry.
* __Waste management:__ 5.7 million tonnes CO<sub>2</sub>eq per year (4.4% of total emissions, 540 kg CO<sub>2</sub>eq per capita per year). Emissions from waste management are mainly produced by landfills, which release methane into the atmosphere from the decomposition of biodegradable material in the landfill body. The solution is to ban landfilling of usable waste, following the example of most EU countries, and to use biodegradable waste to produce biomethane instead of natural gas, for example, in transport.
* __Agriculture:__ 8.61 million tonnes CO<sub>2</sub>eq (6.7% of total emissions, 810 kg CO<sub>2</sub>eq per capita per year). Agricultural emissions come mainly from livestock farming (4.1 million tonnes) in the form of methane emissions and from tillage and associated N2O emissions (4.23 million tonnes CO<sub>2</sub>eq). Reducing the number of livestock (and the associated reduction in beef and dairy consumption), proper management of manure (e.g. by stabilising it in biogas plants) and less intensive fertiliser application would help to reduce methane emissions from agriculture.

To make it easier to compare emissions <!--[-->across EU countries<!--](/infografiky/emise-vybrane-staty)-->, we omit the category of _Land use, land use change and forestry_ (_LULUCF_). Due to carbon storage in green areas, this category has negative emissions in most EU countries, which complicates visualisation. The LULUCF sector is also often [omitted](https://climateactiontracker.org/methodology/indc-ratings-and-lulucf/) from comparisons because it contains high uncertainty in the data. Negative values can mask _structural_ emissions from energy, industry and agriculture, and it is more prone to fluctuations over time. In particular, the Czech Republic has seen a significant fluctuation in recent years due to massive logging during the bark beetle calamity. For 2018, emissions in this sector were estimated to be _positive_ at 5.8 Mt CO<sub>2</sub>eq.

## Notes on emissions data

The emission inventory provided by Eurostat uses the CRF (_Common Reporting Format_) data format and structure. All calculation and reporting methodology is available via the website of the [NGGIP - national greenhouse gas inventory programme](https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/) and is binding for all [UNFCCC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Nations_Framework_Convention_on_Climate_Change) countries. Emissions data are provided to Eurostat by individual EU countries - the Czech Republic’s CHMI compiles the Czech Republic’s data, but several Czech institutions are involved.

The data correspond to emissions produced in the country, but exports and imports of goods may not correspond to emissions from consumption in the country. For example, the Czech Republic exports electricity, steel, cars etc., to other EU countries and imports goods from other EU countries or China. The inclusion of air transport is similarly problematic - the air transport contribution shown corresponds to emissions produced by flights from airports in the Czech Republic. It is likely to be underestimated (many Czechs fly from Vienna or Bratislava) and does not fully account for the amount of emissions that Czechs cause. (For example, a Czech flight to New York with a connection in Amsterdam will only be counted as Prague-Amsterdam in the emissions shown, whereas the Netherlands will count emissions from an Amsterdam-New York flight.) Also not accounted for is that emissions released high in the atmosphere have approximately twice the effect.
